docs: Split, update, improve the contributing guide for reviewers and committers (#27085)
cilium-team/cilium: Documentation/contributing/development/reviewers_committers/review_docs.rst

What is @cilium/docs-structure?
===============================

Team `@cilium/docs-structure <docs-structure_team_>`_ is a GitHub team of
Cilium contributors who are responsible for maintaining the good state of the
project's documentation, by reviewing Pull Requests (PRs) that update the
documentation. Each time a non-draft PR touching files owned by the team is
opened on GitHub, one member of the team is automatically assigned for review.

To join the team, you must be a Cilium Reviewer. See `Cilium's Contributor
Ladder`_ for details on the requirements and the
application process.

.. _docs-structure_team: https://github.com/orgs/cilium/teams/docs-structure
.. _Cilium's Contributor Ladder: https://github.com/cilium/community/blob/main/CONTRIBUTOR-LADDER.md

Reviewing Pull Requests
=======================

This section describes some of the process and expectations for reviewing PRs
on behalf of cilium/docs-structure. Note that :ref:`the generic PR review
process for Committers <review_process>` applies, even though it is not
specific to documentation.

Technical contents
------------------

You are not expected to review the technical aspects of the documentation

> changes in a PR. Obviously, if you do have knowledge of the topic and if you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
changes in a PR, however, if you do have knowledge of the topic and if you
```

find some elements that are incorrect or missing, do flag them.

Documentation structure
-----------------------

> One essential part of the review is to ensure that the contribution maintains a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One essential part of a review is to ensure that the contribution maintains a
```
I feel like this needs to be `a` instead of `the`, but I'm not sure.

coherent structure for the documentation. Ask yourself if the changes are
located on the right page, at the right place. This is especially important if
pages are added, removed, or shuffled around. If the addition is large,
consider whether the page should be split. Consider also whether new text comes
with a satisfactory structure: does it fit well with the surrounding context,
or did the author simply use a "note" box instead of trying to integrate the

> new information to the relevant paragraph?

Reviewer: This is a specific example of one thing to look for in a review, but it's added here in a way that implies this is the main thing that needs to be checked for.

```suggestion
with a satisfactory structure. For example, does the text fit well with the 
surrounding context, or did the author simply use a "note" box instead
of trying to integrate the new information to the relevant paragraph?
```

See also :ref:`the recommendations on documentation structure for contributors
<docs_structure_recommendations>`.

Specific items to look out for
------------------------------

Backports labels
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

See :ref:`the backport criteria for documentation changes
<backport_criteria_docs>`. Mark the PR for backports by setting the labels for
all supported branches to which the changes apply (all supported branches

> containing the parent features to which the modified sections relate).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
all supported branches to which the changes apply and contain
the parent features to which the modified sections relate.
```

CODEOWNERS updates
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> All documentation sources are assigned for review to cilium/docs-structure by

Reviewer: Small nit

```suggestion
All documentation sources are assigned to cilium/docs-structure for review by
```

default. However, when a contributor creates a new page, consider whether it

> should be covered by another team as well (for the technical aspects). If this

Reviewer: Is there a way we could remove the parentheses here?

Author: There's always a way :slightly_smiling_face: I'll figure out something.

is the case, ask the author to update the CODEOWNERS file.

Beta disclaimer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When a feature is advertised as Beta in the PR, make sure that the author
clearly indicates it as such in the documentation, both by mentioning "(Beta)"
in the title of the section for the feature and by including the dedicated

> banner.

Reviewer: It might be a good idea to add a note here explaining how to do this, or a copy of the text that we expect folks to include.

Upgrade notes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When the PR introduces new user-facing options, metrics, or behavior, in such a
way that it affects upgrades or downgrades, ensure that the author summarizes

> the changes with a note in Documentation/operations/upgrade.rst.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the changes with a note in `Documentation/operations/upgrade.rst`.
```

Does this need backticks?

Author: Double back-ticks, even.

Completeness
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Make sure that new or updated content is complete, with no TODOs.

Auto-generated reference documents
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are some reference documents (command reference, Helm reference) that
should be automatically updated when parts of the Cilium repository change. You
should ensure that everything is up-to-date, although the CI does in fact
handle the verification for you. But you may have to accompany contributors and

> help them figure out the command they need to run to perform the update.

Reviewer: There are a couple of items in this paragraph that we discuss but don't provide specific definitions or pointers for. I think a user may have trouble understanding what exactly is meant here. For instance, I'm left with the following questions:

* What is a reference document used for?
* How can I identify a reference document?
* What changes to the Cilium repository require my attention in this matter?
* What do I need to do to ensure everything is up to date?
* How do I know what command I need to run to perform the update? Where can I find it?

Author: This would make for an entire separate guide, and I'm sure we'd struggle to keep it up-to-date :confused:. Not sure how to address this.

Reviewer: Maybe we could add it as a todo and just leave this be for now?

Author: Yes, I'll open an issue for the build framework and mention this as well.

Spell checker exceptions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Documentation checks include running a spell checker, which has a list of

> exceptions ("good words"). Team cilium/docs-structure is the owner for this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
exceptions, referred to as "good words". Team cilium/docs-structure is the owner for this
```

> file. There's usually not much to look at, but it's good to keep it clean:

Reviewer: This is great voice but may not fit in a technical document.

Reviewer: Also see [1]

Author: What do you mean by “this is great voice”? I'm not sure I understand, I can rephrase to be more suited to a tech doc.

Author: updated

Reviewer: Ah sorry I wasn't more clear on this- the changes you made look great. By "this is great voice" I meant that it had great personality. But from my understanding docs need to be more dry.

>   - Entries should remain sorted alphabetically (mind the case)

Reviewer: I think it would make sense to remove the word `should` here and also remove the parentheses.

```suggestion
  - Entries are sorted alphabetically. Words starting with uppercase letters come before words starting with lowercase letters.
```

>   - If a new entry is misspelled, reject it

Reviewer: I think this could be reworded to make the 'Entry' more of a subject.
```suggestion
  - Entries in the wordlist should be spelled correctly.
```

  - Lowercase entries are considered case-insensitive, so it's no use adding an

>     entry with capital letters if the lowercase version is already in

Reviewer: This line also has some great voice, but it may not fit. [1]

Author: Can you please explain? I can change the “it's no use”, is this what you're talking about?

Author: updated

Reviewer: The changes you made look great! Sorry I wasn't clear- it was the "it's no use" that I was referring to.

Netlify preview
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Netlify builds a new preview for each PR touching the documentation. You are

Reviewer: Can we add a link to Netlify's homepage or the like?

Author: I can, but I think you can't access much if you haven't been added to the right Netlify team, so the interest is limited.

What really matters here would be the links to the Netlify previews (or build failures) in the list of GitHub workflows, I can maybe try to mention that.

not expected to check the preview for each PR. However, do have a look if the
PR contains some involved formatting changes, such as nested blocks or

> directives, or work on tables or tabs. Also look at the preview if you have a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
directives, or changes to tables or tabs. Also look at the preview if you have a
```

doubt as to the validity of the reStructuredText (RST) mark-up that the author
uses.

Formatting
----------

Read :ref:`Cilium's documentation style guide <docs_style_guide>`.

Flag poor formatting or obvious mistakes. The syntax for RST is not always
trivial and some contributors get it wrong, or they simply forget this is RST
and they employ Markdown mark-up instead. Make sure they fix such issues.

Keep an eye on :ref:`code-blocks <docs_style_code_blocks>`: do they include RST
substitutions, and if so, do they use the right directive? If not, do they use
the right language?

Beyond that, the amount of time you should spend on suggestions for improving
formatting is up to you.

Grammar and style
-----------------

Read :ref:`Cilium's documentation style guide <docs_style_guide>`.

Flag obvious grammar mistakes. Try to read the updated text as a user would.
Ask the contributors to rework any sentence that is too difficult to read or to
understand.

> We aim at keeping the documentation clean, consistent, and in a clear and

Reviewer: It might make sense here to remove `we` and replace it with `sig/docs-structure`.

Author: Right, this was better suited for the Google Doc than for Cilium's docs. Good catch.

comprehensible state. User experience must always be as good as possible. To
achieve this objective, Documentation updates should follow best practices,
such as the ones from the style guide, but reviewing PRs in-depth to flag all
potential style improvements can be time consuming, so the amount of effort
that you put into style guidance is up to you.

> As of this writing, there is no tooling in place to enforce particular style

Reviewer: Should we rely on versioning to handle in-time statements?

```suggestion
There is no tooling in place to enforce particular style
```

Reviewer: Also see [2]

Author: No that's another leftover from the Google Doc, I should just switch to your suggestion.

recommendations.

Documentation build
===================

The build framework
-------------------

> To do. See:

Reviewer: To do :)

Author: Yep, I was kinda hoping I could get away with this one. I don't have this content yet and wasn't sure it was worth blocking this guide for it. I know we just started to discourage their use in the docs though :confused:

Reviewer: Maybe we could compromise and add this as a todo in an issue, but remove the `To do` line in the docs?

Author: Sounds good. I'll open a separate issue for this, and for the auto-generated docs.

Author: https://github.com/cilium/cilium/issues/27098

  - :ref:`Instructions for building the documentation locally
    <testing-documentation>`
  - ``Documentation/Makefile``, ``Documentation/Dockerfile``,
    ``Documentation/check-build.sh``
  - Dependencies are in ``Documentation/requirements.txt``, which is generated
    from ``Documentation/requirements_min/requirements.txt``
  - The Sphinx theme we use is `our own fork <cilium_rtd_theme_>`_ of Read the
    Docs's theme

.. _cilium_rtd_theme: https://github.com/cilium/sphinx_rtd_theme

Relevant CI workflows
---------------------

Netlify preview
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Documentation changes trigger the build of a new Netlify preview. If the build
fails, the PR authors or reviewers must investigate it (ideally the author, but
in practice, contributors are not always familiar with RST or with our build

> framework, so consider giving a hand).

Reviewer: Can we remove the parentheses here?

Author: Certainly

Documentation build
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Same as the Netlify preview, the Documentation workflow runs on doc changes and
can raise missing updates on various generated pieces of documentation.

Checkpatch
~~~~~~~~~~

> The Checkpatch workflow (part of the BPF tests) is not directly relevant to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Checkpatch workflow is part of the BPF tests and is not directly relevant to
```

> documentation, but may raise some patch formatting issues, so you should run it

Reviewer: It might make sense to add information on what a patch formatting issue is, but definitely not necessary.

Author: It's “commit subject is too long”.

... unless you start touching the `bpf/` code.

I'll figure out something.

even on doc-only PRs.

Integration tests
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Integration tests (on Travis, or on GitHub Actions) are the only workflow that
> rebuilds the ``docs-builder`` image. Building this image is necessary to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Integration tests run on Travis and GitHub Actions are the only workflows that
rebuild the ``docs-builder`` image. Building this image is necessary to
```

validate changes to the ``Documentation/Dockerfile`` or to the list of Python

> dependencies (from ``Documentation/requirements.txt``). The GitHub workflow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dependencies found in ``Documentation/requirements.txt``. The GitHub workflow
```

uses a pre-built image instead, and won't incorporate changes to these files.

Integration tests also run a full build in the Cilium repository, including the

> post-build checks (and in particular, ``Documentation/Makefile``'s ``check``
> target). Therefore, they are able to raise inconsistencies in auto-generated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
post-build checks, in particular, ``Documentation/Makefile``'s ``check``
target. Therefore, integration tests are able to raise inconsistencies in auto-generated
```

files in the documentation.

Ready to merge
--------------

> Committers usually require a PR to pass the full suite of CI test before they

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Committers usually require a PR to pass the full suite of CI tests before they
```

> can merge it. However, as of this writing, there is no clear consensus on

Reviewer: [2]

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

.. _review_docs:

************************************
Reviewing for @cilium/docs-structure
************************************

What is @cilium/docs-structure?
===============================

Team `@cilium/docs-structure <docs-structure_team_>`_ is a GitHub team of
Cilium contributors who are responsible for maintaining the good state of the
project's documentation, by reviewing Pull Requests (PRs) that update the

> documentation. Each time a non-draft PR touching files owned by the team is
> opened on GitHub, one member of the team is automatically assigned for review.

Reviewer 2: Assignment is a GitHub Action, right? So we can use active voice accurately here?
```suggestion
documentation. Each time a non-draft PR touching files owned by the team opens on GitHub, a GitHub Action automatically assigns one member of the team for review.
```

Author: It's GitHub code review auto-assignment system, I don't think it's an Action itself (my understanding is that an Action is a block that can be used to build Workflows; and that “GitHub Actions” also designate the whole automation system?). But yeah, I can just use “GitHub” as a subject.

To join the team, you must be a Cilium Reviewer. See `Cilium's Contributor
Ladder`_ for details on the requirements and the
application process.

.. _docs-structure_team: https://github.com/orgs/cilium/teams/docs-structure
.. _Cilium's Contributor Ladder: https://github.com/cilium/community/blob/main/CONTRIBUTOR-LADDER.md

Reviewing Pull Requests
=======================

This section describes some of the process and expectations for reviewing PRs
on behalf of cilium/docs-structure. Note that :ref:`the generic PR review
process for Committers <review_process>` applies, even though it is not
specific to documentation.

Technical Contents
------------------

> You are not expected to review the technical aspects of the documentation
> changes in a PR, however, if you do have knowledge of the topic and if you find
> some elements that are incorrect or missing, do flag them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You are not expected to review the technical aspects of the documentation
changes in a PR. However, if you do have knowledge of the topic and if you find
some elements that are incorrect or missing, do flag them.
```

Documentation Structure
-----------------------

One essential part of a review is to ensure that the contribution maintains a
coherent structure for the documentation. Ask yourself if the changes are
located on the right page, at the right place. This is especially important if
pages are added, removed, or shuffled around. If the addition is large,

> consider whether the page should be split. Consider also whether new text comes

Reviewer 2: wording nit
```suggestion
consider whether the page needs to split. Consider also whether new text comes
```

with a satisfactory structure. For example, does it fit well with the
surrounding context, or did the author simply use a "note" box instead of
trying to integrate the new information to the relevant paragraph?

See also :ref:`the recommendations on documentation structure for contributors
<docs_structure_recommendations>`.

Specific Items to Look Out For
------------------------------

> Backports Labels
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 2: typo nit
```suggestion
Backport Labels
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

See :ref:`the backport criteria for documentation changes
<backport_criteria_docs>`. Mark the PR for backports by setting the labels for
all supported branches to which the changes apply, that is to say, all
supported branches containing the parent features to which the modified
sections relate.

CODEOWNERS Updates
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All documentation sources are assigned to cilium/docs-structure for review by
default. However, when a contributor creates a new page, consider whether it
should be covered by another team as well so that this other team can review
the technical aspects. If this is the case, ask the author to update the
CODEOWNERS file.

Beta Disclaimer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When a feature is advertised as Beta in the PR, make sure that the author

> clearly indicates it as such in the documentation, both by mentioning "(Beta)"

Reviewer 2: Edits for clarity
```suggestion
clearly indicates the Beta state in the documentation, both by mentioning "(Beta)"
```

in the title of the section for the feature and by including the dedicated
banner. Users can include this banner by using the ``include`` directive for

> the ``Documentation/beta.rst`` fragment.

Reviewer 2: It would be good to include an example here:
```suggestion
the ``Documentation/beta.rst`` fragment.

.. parsed-literal::
    
    .. include:: Documentation/beta.rst
```

Author: I didn't want initially because the relative path depends on where we include from, and I didn't want to mislead the readers; but it's true we can just as well use an absolute path.

Upgrade Notes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> When the PR introduces new user-facing options, metrics, or behavior, in such a
> way that it affects upgrades or downgrades, ensure that the author summarizes
> the changes with a note in ``Documentation/operations/upgrade.rst``.

Reviewer 2: Clarity
```suggestion
When the PR introduces new user-facing options, metrics, or behavior
that affects upgrades or downgrades, ensure that the author summarizes
the changes with a note in ``Documentation/operations/upgrade.rst``.
```

Completeness
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Make sure that new or updated content is complete, with no TODOs.

Auto-Generated Reference Documents
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> There are some reference documents (command reference, Helm reference) that
> should be automatically updated when parts of the Cilium repository change. You
> should ensure that everything is up-to-date, although the CI does in fact
> handle the verification for you. But you may have to accompany contributors and
> help them figure out the command they need to run to perform the update.

Reviewer 2: Edits for clarity
```suggestion
Some reference documents (command reference, Helm reference) 
are automatically updated when parts of the Cilium repository change. You
Although the CI handles verification, you can still ensure that everything is
up-to-date, although the CI. You may have to help contributors
figure out which command they need to perform the update.
```

Author: I rewrote the whole paragraph:

```
When certain parts of the Cilium repository change, contributors may have to
update some auto-generated reference documents that are part of Cilium's
documentation, such as the command reference or the Helm reference. The CI
validates that these updates are present in the PR. If they are missing, you
may have to help contributors figure out what commands they need to run to
perform the updates. These commands are usually provided in the logs of the
GitHub workflows that failed to pass.
```

Reviewer 2: Even better. ✨

Spell Checker Exceptions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Documentation checks include running a spell checker. This spell checker

> uses a file containing a list of exceptions to ignore, to make it possible to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
uses a file, ``Documentation/spelling_wordlist.txt``, containing a list of spelling exceptions to ignore.
```

> use technical terms that are not in its dictionary. Team cilium/docs-structure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Team cilium/docs-structure
```

> is the owner for this file. Usually, there is not much feedback to provide on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
owns this file and its associated script, ``Documentation/update-spelling_wordlist.sh``. Usually, there is not much feedback to provide on
```

Author: True, but I'm not sure what this info brings in the context of the instructions for reviewing updates to the spelling exceptions :thinking:. I'd rather have it mentioned as part of the docs build framework, when we describe it?

Reviewer 2: That's fair; the script doesn't need a mention here.

> updates to this file, but reviewers should keep the following items in mind:

Reviewer 2: Edits for clarity
```suggestion
updates to this file. It's useful for reviewers to know that:
```

  - Entries are sorted alphabetically, with all words starting with uppercase
    letters coming before words starting with lowercase letters.
  - Entries in the list of exceptions must be spelled correctly.

>   - Lowercase entries are considered case-insensitive, so reviewers should

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Lowercase entries are case-insensitive, so reviewers should
```

    reject new entries with capital letters if the lowercase versions are
    already in the list.

Netlify Preview
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

`Netlify`_ builds a new preview for each PR touching the documentation. You are

> not expected to check the preview for each PR. However, do have a look if the
> PR contains some involved formatting changes, such as nested blocks or
> directives, or changes to tables or tabs. Also look at the preview if you have

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
not expected to check the preview for each PR. However, if the
PR contains detailed formatting changes, such as nested blocks or
directives, or changes to tables or tabs, it's good to verify that changes
render as expected. Also verify the preview if you have
```

a doubt as to the validity of the reStructuredText (RST) mark-up that the
author uses.

> The link to the Netlify preview is available from the list of the checks on the
> page of the PR. If the preview build failed, the link leads to the build logs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The list of checks on the PR page contains a link to the Netlify preview.
If the preview build failed, the link leads to the build logs.
```

.. _Netlify: https://www.netlify.com/?attr=homepage-modal

Formatting
----------

Read :ref:`Cilium's documentation style guide <docs_style_guide>`.

Flag poor formatting or obvious mistakes. The syntax for RST is not always

> trivial and some contributors get it wrong, or they simply forget this is RST

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
trivial and some contributors make mistakes, or they simply forget to use RST
```

Author: Clearly sounds better, thanks

> and they employ Markdown mark-up instead. Make sure they fix such issues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and they employ Markdown mark-up instead. Make sure authors fix such issues.
```

Keep an eye on :ref:`code-blocks <docs_style_code_blocks>`: do they include RST
substitutions, and if so, do they use the right directive? If not, do they use
the right language?

> Beyond that, the amount of time you should spend on suggestions for improving

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Beyond that, the amount of time you spend on suggestions for improving
```

formatting is up to you.

Grammar and Style
-----------------

Read :ref:`Cilium's documentation style guide <docs_style_guide>`.

Flag obvious grammar mistakes. Try to read the updated text as a user would.

> Ask the contributors to rework any sentence that is too difficult to read or to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ask the contributors to revise any sentence that is too difficult to read or to
```

understand.

> @cilium/docs-structure aims at keeping the documentation clean, consistent, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
@cilium/docs-structure aims to keep the documentation clean, consistent, and
```

in a clear and comprehensible state. User experience must always be as good as

> possible. To achieve this objective, Documentation updates should follow best

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
possible. To achieve this objective, Documentation updates must follow best
```

> practices, such as the ones from the style guide, but reviewing PRs in-depth to
> flag all potential style improvements can be time consuming, so the amount of
> effort that you put into style guidance is up to you.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
practices, such as the ones from the style guide. Reviewing PRs at sufficient depth to
flag all potential style improvements can be time consuming, so the amount of
effort you put into style guidance is up to you.
```

    are already in the list.

Netlify preview
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

`Netlify`_ builds a new preview for each PR touching the documentation. You are
not expected to check the preview for each PR. However, if the PR contains
detailed formatting changes, such as nested blocks or directives, or changes to
tables or tabs, then it's good to validate that changes render as expected.
Also check the preview if you have a doubt as to the validity of the
reStructuredText (RST) mark-up that the author uses.

The list of checks on the PR page contains a link to the Netlify preview. If
the preview build failed, the link leads to the build logs.

.. _Netlify: https://www.netlify.com/?attr=homepage-modal

Formatting
----------

Read :ref:`Cilium's documentation style guide <docs_style_guide>`.

Flag poor formatting or obvious mistakes. The syntax for RST is not always
trivial and some contributors make mistakes, or they simply forget to use RST
and they employ Markdown mark-up instead. Make sure authors fix such issues.

Keep an eye on :ref:`code-blocks <docs_style_code_blocks>`: do they include RST
substitutions, and if so, do they use the right directive? If not, do they use
the right language?

> 

Reviewer 3: Not sure whether it's specifically worth mentioning here or if we think it's covered by "read the style guide" but callouts are another low-hanging fruit that is worth keeping vigilant over. I think that this is pretty well understood across @cilium/docs-structure already today, but if we think it's helpful to also explicitly mention here then by all means let's do so. I don't have a strong opinion about this.

Author: Callouts are also explicitly mentioned on this page, but earlier, under "Documentation structure" (given that they're not just formatting, but more a matter of how the new info is incorporated into the document).
